# 2.4: Signed and Unsigned Numbers

Numbers are kept in computer hardware as binary numbers- base 2. This means all information ever stored comes down to the **bit**, or binary digit: 0 or 1. We can also think of this binary value as true or false, on or off, high or low, etc.

Generalizing, in base $b$, the value of the $i$th digit $d$ is $d*b^i$. In this case, $i$ starts at 0 and increases as digits move right to left. For example, $1011_2$ represents $(1*2^3) + (0*2^2) + (1*2^1) + (1*2^0) = 11$ in base 10.

For this note, we consider a **word** to be 32 bits (4 bytes) and a **doubleword** to be 64 bits (8 bytes). However, on 32-bit architectures, words are 16 bits (2 bytes) and doublewords are 32 bits (4 bytes). 

In any set of bits, **least significant bit** (LSB)  = rightmost bit (index 0). **most significant bit** = leftmost bit. 

RISC-V doublewords are 64 bits long, so we have $2^{64}$ possible doublewords. Each represents a number in $[0, 2^{64}-1]$. 

**Unsigned numbers** multiply each bit by a power of 2- making negative numbers impossible. 

**Overflow** occurs when there aren't enough bits to represent a number. Responsibility of programming language + OS to handle overflow.

**Sign and magnitude** representation adds a single bit that represents the *sign* of the number- this allows negatives now. Unfortunately, there's some issues. There might be ambiguity on where to put the sign bit. Computers might also need to (inefficiently) calculate the sign bit separately. Finally, we now have two representations for zero (positive sign zero and negative sign zero), which may cause problems. So this is a start but not good enough.

Finally, **two's complement** representation was finalized: leading 0s mean positive, leading 1s negative. For example, $0000...0001_2$ = 1, while $1000...0001_2 = -2^{63} + 1$. In effect there's now 63 bits we can work with for magnitude, and it's now *split* into positive and negative intervals by the 64th bit. Positive numbers range $[0, 2^{63}-1]$, while negative numbers span $[-2^{63}, -1]$. Unfortunately, negative numbers had a range 1 number larger than positive- but now there's no ambiguity like in sign and magnitude. This is now the universal standard for number representation.

All negative numbers in two's complement have 1 as the MSB- easy to test positivity of number! This (MSB) bit is also called the **sign bit**. This sign bit is multiplied by $-2^{63}$ (or $-2^{31}$ for 32-bit doublewords). Everything else is multiplied by a positive base. 

However, overflow can still occur in two's complement, if the sign bit is incorrect. 

Loads need to account for sign too. Signed loads need to apply **sign extension**, which fills the bits to the left of the number (Unsigned loads must extend 0s because only positive numbers allowed). RISC-V has unsigned loads (`lbu` ) and signed loads (`lb`). C primarily uses `lbu` for byte loads. 

Memory addresses are *absolutely* unsigned numbers-- negative addresses are nonsensical. So sometimes we want to switch "modes" between unsigned and signed number reps. C is a language that allows this: for example, signed integers have type `(signed) long long int`, and unsigned integers `unsigned long long int`.

### Two's Complement: Shortcuts

There is a very quick negation process in 2's complement: Invert every bit and add 1. We know that inverting every bit and adding it to the original results in $111...111_2$ (all 1 bits). We also know the sum of a number and its negation is 0. So adding 1 to the inversion will make this sum from -1 to 0, and we've found our negation.

Another shortcut is **sign extension**, used when we need to represent a number in a higher-bit field. We take the sign bit (MSB) and extend it left. This works because positive 2's complement numbers have infinite left 0s and negative 2's complement numbers have infinite left 1s. Sign extension simply restores bits to fit the newly extended hardware. 

We also have **one's complement** number representation. Its main property is that negation is simply inverting each bit without adding 1. This has two zero reps: $0000...0000_2$ and $1111...1111_2$. However, unlike 2's complement, that extra zero representation means that positive and negative range is balanced. Our "sign bit" is the MSB, like in 2's complement. 

Finally, we have **biased notation**, where we *bias* numbers such that the number + bias >= 0. In other words, we convert bits to unsigned then *subtract* the bias to get our biased integer. Because biased representation is scaled with the unsigned range, the most *negative* value is $0000...0000_2$ (minimum unsigned value) and the most *positive* value is $1111...1111_2$ (maximum unsigned value). A biased 0 is typically $1000...0000_2$: exactly the bias value in unsigned.

## Summary

Computers need to represent positive and negative numbers. Although multiple representations exist, two's complement is the way to do it. 