# Type Conversions

Operands with different types are *automatically converted* to the same type before executing the operator. Generally, we only implicitly cast types to "wider" types such that the wider type loses no information: for example, `int` to `float`. However, expressions that might lose information might incur a warning but are not illegal: for example, assigning a `float` to an `int`. 

Remember `char` is really just a small `int`. We can freely use `char` in arithmetic. We can see this usefulness in the common `atoi` function, which converts a string of integers into an actual `int`:

```C
int atoi(char s[]) {
    int i, n;
    n = 0;
    for (i = 0; s[i] >= '0' && s[i] <= '9'; ++i)
        n = 10 * n + (s[i] - '0');
    return n;
}
```

Basically what we're doing is iterating through each *character* digit in `s` and multiplying it by the proper power of 10, then adding it to form our overall base-10 integer. Remember that `s[i] - 0` converts a character digit to its integral value (offset from the `'0'` character). 

Function `lower`, which maps a single character to lower case, also utilizes char to int conversion: 

```C
int lower(int c) {
    if (c >= 'A' && c <= 'Z')
        return c + 'a' - 'A';
    else
        return c;
}
```

In ASCII, lowercase alphabet and uppercase is contiguous, so the range between uppercase and lowercase for each letter is constant. NOTE: Other character sets, like EBCDIC, do not follow this property. 

Luckily, we can use functions in `<ctype.h>` such as `isdigit(c)` and `tolower(c)` instead of the character comparison operators. However, it was still good to understand how they worked. But there's no reason to NOT abstract away this logic now. 

C does not specify if `char` is signed or unsigned. Can a `char` cast to a negative `int`? The answer is machine-dependent, i.e. whether sign-extension occurs in the extra three bytes or not. However, C guarantees `char`s are always positive integers. But arbitrary bit patterns stored in character variables may appear to be negative on some machines, yet positive on others. So for portability, specify `unsigned char` or `signed char` if non-character values are to be stored in `char` variables. 

Functions like `isdigit` can return *any nonzero value*. instead of `1`, for true. However, `true` in conditional expressions just checks for non-zero for true, so this won't make a difference.

There are conversion rules for different operands, and the "lower" type is converted to "higher" according to C's preference type chart. 

Conversion rules are more complicated for unsigned operands. The problem is that comparisons between signed and unsigned values are machine-dependent, because they depend on the sizes of the various integer types. For example, suppose that int is 16 bits and long is 32 bits. Then -1L < 1U, because 1U, which is an unsigned int, is promoted to a signed long. But -1L > 1UL because -1L is promoted to unsigned long and thus appears to be a large positive number.